Improved Documentation (#1530)
jenkinsci/docker: README.md

Otherwise a banner will appear prompting the user to install additional plugins,
which may be inappropriate.

### Access logs

To enable Jenkins user access logs from Jenkins home directory inside docker container, you can use `JENKINS_OPTS` under ENV section (in ansible role).

```
JENKINS_OPTS: "--accessLoggerClassName=winstone.accesslog.SimpleAccessLogger --simpleAccessLogger.format=combined --simpleAccessLogger.file=/var/jenkins_home/logs/access_log"
```

### Naming convention in tags

The naming convention for the tags on Docker Hub follows the format <repository_name>:<tag>, where the repository name is jenkins/jenkins and the tag specifies the version of the image. In the case of the LTS and latest versions, the tags are lts and latest, respectively.

You can use these tags to pull the corresponding Jenkins images from Docker Hub and run them on your system. For example, you can use the following command to pull the LTS version of the Jenkins image: `docker pull jenkins/jenkins:lts`

### Docker Compose with Jenkins

> To use Docker Compose with Jenkins, you can define a docker-compose.yml file that includes a Jenkins service and any other services that your Jenkins instance depends on, such as a database or cache. For example, the following docker-compose.yml file defines a Jenkins service that uses a MySQL database and a Redis cache:

Reviewer: What is the purpose of using mysql or redis ? Since it is a « get started » example somhow, what do you think about using, instead of mysql and redis, an ssh-agent based on the jenkins/ssh-agent official image instead ?

Author: make sense, addressed in https://github.com/jenkinsci/docker/pull/1530/commits/32ea849b7e5e4f7558632d19ee003537574095c7

```

> version: "3"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

version is deprecated in docker compose as per https://docs.docker.com/compose/compose-file/compose-versioning/

Author: Addressed in [32ea849](https://github.com/jenkinsci/docker/pull/1530/commits/32ea849b7e5e4f7558632d19ee003537574095c7)

services:
  jenkins:
    image: jenkins/jenkins:lts
    ports:
      - "8080:8080"
    volumes:

>       - "./jenkins_home:/var/jenkins_home"

Reviewer: Bind mounting a volume from the host is not a good practise. What do you think about providing a named volume instead ?

it would avoid many beginners issues such as permissions issues, performances issues (if the bind mounted volume is shared through the VM like… Docker Desktop).

Author: Added named volume. However, it is important to note that named volumes are not a replacement for proper backups. It is still a good idea to periodically backup your data to a secure location.

>     links:

Reviewer: Links should not be usef because it is deprecated : https://docs.docker.com/compose/compose-file/compose-file-v2/

### Naming convention in tags

The naming convention for the tags on Docker Hub follows the format `<repository_name>:<tag>`, where the repository name is jenkins/jenkins and where the tag specifies the image version. In the case of the LTS and latest versions, the tags are `lts` and `latest`, respectively.

You can use these tags to pull the corresponding Jenkins images from Docker Hub and run them on your system. For example, to pull the LTS version of the Jenkins image use this command: `docker pull jenkins/jenkins:lts`

### Docker Compose with Jenkins

To use Docker Compose with Jenkins, you can define a docker-compose.yml file including a Jenkins instance and any other services it depends on. For example, the following docker-compose.yml file defines a Jenkins controller and a Jenkins SSH agent:

```
version: '3.8'
services:
  jenkins:
    image: jenkins/jenkins:lts
    ports:
      - "8080:8080"
    volumes:
      - jenkins_home:/var/jenkins_home
  ssh-agent:
    image: jenkins/ssh-agent
    volumes:
      - ssh-agent-volume:/ssh-agent
volumes:
  jenkins_home:
  ssh-agent-volume:

```

> This docker-compose.yml file creates two containers: one for Jenkins and one for the ssh-agent. The Jenkins container is based on the jenkins/jenkins:lts image and exposes the Jenkins web interface on port 8080.
> The jenkins_home volume is a named volume that is created and managed by Docker. It is mounted at /var/jenkins_home in the Jenkins container, and it will persist the Jenkins configuration and data.
> 
> `jenkins_home` is a named volume created and managed by Docker. It is mounted at /var/jenkins_home in the Jenkins container, and will persist Jenkins configuration and data.
> 
> Using a named volume can be a good alternative to a bind mount from the host if you want to store the data in a location managed by Docker and separated from the host file system. It can also be more portable as the data is stored within the Docker ecosystem and not tied to a specific host directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This docker-compose.yml file creates two containers: one for Jenkins and one for the ssh-agent.
The Jenkins container is based on the jenkins/jenkins:lts image and exposes the Jenkins web interface on port 8080.
The jenkins_home volume is a named volume that is created and managed by Docker.
It is mounted at /var/jenkins_home in the Jenkins container, and it will persist the Jenkins configuration and data.

`jenkins_home` is a named volume created and managed by Docker.
It is mounted at /var/jenkins_home in the Jenkins container, and will persist Jenkins configuration and data.

Using a named volume can be a good alternative to a bind mount from the host if you want to store the data in a location managed by Docker and separated from the host file system.
It can also be more portable as the data is stored within the Docker ecosystem and not tied to a specific host directory.
```

which may be inappropriate.

### Access logs

To enable Jenkins user access logs from Jenkins home directory inside a docker container, set the `JENKINS_OPTS` environment variable value to `--accessLoggerClassName=winstone.accesslog.SimpleAccessLogger --simpleAccessLogger.format=combined --simpleAccessLogger.file=/var/jenkins_home/logs/access_log`

### Naming convention in tags

The naming convention for the tags on Docker Hub follows the format `<repository_name>:<tag>`, where the repository name is jenkins/jenkins and where the tag specifies the image version.
In the case of the LTS and latest versions, the tags are `lts` and `latest`, respectively.

You can use these tags to pull the corresponding Jenkins images from Docker Hub and run them on your system.
For example, to pull the LTS version of the Jenkins image use this command: `docker pull jenkins/jenkins:lts`

### Docker Compose with Jenkins

To use Docker Compose with Jenkins, you can define a docker-compose.yml file including a Jenkins instance and any other services it depends on.
For example, the following docker-compose.yml file defines a Jenkins controller and a Jenkins SSH agent:

```yaml

> version: "3.8"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

the keyword « version » is considered a legacy, and the version « 3.x » is only for docker swarm

Author: Oops, missed this. Fixed in https://github.com/jenkinsci/docker/pull/1530/commits/739058c938316fad9ff45338dae2b079c846551e

> To use Docker Compose with Jenkins, you can define a docker-compose.yml file that includes a Jenkins service and any other services that your Jenkins instance depends on, such as a database or ssh-agent. For example, the following docker-compose.yml file defines a Jenkins service that uses a Jenkins ssh-agent:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use Docker Compose with Jenkins, you can define a docker-compose.yml file including a Jenkins instance and any other services it depends on, such as a database or an agent. For example, the following docker-compose.yml file defines a Jenkins controller and a Jenkins SSH agent:
```

      - jenkins_home:/var/jenkins_home
    environment:
      - JENKINS_OPTS=-Dhudson.slaves.NodeProvisioner.initialDelay=0
  ssh-agent:
    image: jenkins/ssh-agent
    volumes:
      - ssh-agent-volume:/ssh-agent
volumes:
  jenkins_home:
  ssh-agent-volume:

```

This docker-compose.yml file creates two containers: one for Jenkins and one for the ssh-agent. The Jenkins container is based on the jenkins/jenkins:lts image and exposes the Jenkins web interface on port 8080 and the Jenkins agent communication port on port 50000.
The jenkins_home volume is a named volume that is created and managed by Docker. It is mounted at /var/jenkins_home in the Jenkins container, and it will persist the Jenkins configuration and data.

Using a named volume can be a good alternative to a bind mount from the host if you want to store the data in a location that is managed by Docker and separate from the host file system. It can also be more portable, as the data is stored within the Docker ecosystem and is not tied to a specific host directory.

The ssh-agent container is based on the jenkins/ssh-agent image and mounts a named volume ssh-agent-volume at /ssh-agent to persist the ssh keys.

> To start the Jenkins instance and the other services defined in the docker-compose.yml file, you can use the docker-compose up command. This will pull the necessary images from Docker Hub, if they are not already present on your system, and start the services in the background. You can then access the Jenkins web interface on port 8080 on your host system to configure and manage your Jenkins instance using `docker-compose up -d`.

Author: make sense, addressed in https://github.com/jenkinsci/docker/pull/1530/commits/b1d964a5d8923c9a919b4432b40f66b618678e96

> To start the Jenkins instance and the other services defined in the docker-compose.yml file, you can use the docker-compose up command. This will pull the necessary images from Docker Hub, if they are not already present on your system, and start the services in the background. You can then access the Jenkins web interface on port 8080 on your host system to configure and manage your Jenkins instance using `docker-compose up -d`.

Author: make sense, addressed in https://github.com/jenkinsci/docker/pull/1530/commits/b1d964a5d8923c9a919b4432b40f66b618678e96

which may be inappropriate.

### Access logs

To enable Jenkins user access logs from Jenkins home directory inside a docker container, set the `JENKINS_OPTS` environment variable value to `--accessLoggerClassName=winstone.accesslog.SimpleAccessLogger --simpleAccessLogger.format=combined --simpleAccessLogger.file=/var/jenkins_home/logs/access_log`

### Naming convention in tags

The naming convention for the tags on Docker Hub follows the format `<repository_name>:<tag>`, where the repository name is jenkins/jenkins and where the tag specifies the image version.
In the case of the LTS and latest versions, the tags are `lts` and `latest`, respectively.

You can use these tags to pull the corresponding Jenkins images from Docker Hub and run them on your system.
For example, to pull the LTS version of the Jenkins image use this command: `docker pull jenkins/jenkins:lts`

### Docker Compose with Jenkins

To use Docker Compose with Jenkins, you can define a docker-compose.yml file including a Jenkins instance and any other services it depends on.
For example, the following docker-compose.yml file defines a Jenkins controller and a Jenkins SSH agent:

> ```
> version: '3.8'
> services:
>   jenkins:
>     image: jenkins/jenkins:lts
>     ports:
>       - "8080:8080"
>     volumes:
>       - jenkins_home:/var/jenkins_home
>   ssh-agent:
>     image: jenkins/ssh-agent
>     volumes:
>       - ssh-agent-volume:/ssh-agent
> volumes:
>   jenkins_home:
>   ssh-agent-volume:
> 
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```yaml
services:
  jenkins:
    image: jenkins/jenkins:lts
    ports:
      - "8080:8080"
    volumes:
      - jenkins_home:/var/jenkins_home
  ssh-agent:
    image: jenkins/ssh-agent

volumes:
  jenkins_home:

```
````

Suggestion:
- Add explicit syntax color to the codeblock (use yaml)
- Remove the `version` attribute as it is deprecated (as per https://docs.docker.com/compose/compose-file/compose-versioning/#versioning)
- Remove the SSH agent volume: this snippet is focused on the Jenkins controller so better limiting the cognitive overload of the reader

> This docker-compose.yml file creates two containers: one for Jenkins and one for the ssh-agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This docker-compose.yml file creates two containers: one for Jenkins and one for the Jenkins SSH agent.
```

Use the same naming as used before the codeblock for coherency.

> The Jenkins container is based on the jenkins/jenkins:lts image and exposes the Jenkins web interface on port 8080.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Jenkins container is based on the `jenkins/jenkins:lts` image and exposes the Jenkins web interface on port 8080.
```

Use "inline" font for filenames (implicit convention is markdown files)

> The jenkins_home volume is a named volume that is created and managed by Docker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `jenkins_home` volume is a [named volume](https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/) that is created and managed by Docker.
```

- Use "inline" font for code reference
- Add a link to Docker official documentation to provide actionnables to the reader

> It is mounted at /var/jenkins_home in the Jenkins container, and it will persist the Jenkins configuration and data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is mounted at `/var/jenkins_home` in the Jenkins container, and it will persist the Jenkins configuration and data.
```

> `jenkins_home` is a named volume created and managed by Docker.
> It is mounted at /var/jenkins_home in the Jenkins container, and will persist Jenkins configuration and data.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

There is a duplication of these 2 lines with the above.

> Using a named volume can be a good alternative to a bind mount from the host if you want to store the data in a location managed by Docker and separated from the host file system.
> It can also be more portable as the data is stored within the Docker ecosystem and not tied to a specific host directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Limit the reader cognitive overload. This is an example snippet that should show a reference.

Bind mounting a an edge case that should not be advertised neither mentioned in this README (because not portable, not performant, not reliable, source of MANY problemsà.

Better to link to Docker volumes documentation instead (see my suggestion above).

> The ssh-agent container is based on the jenkins/ssh-agent image and mounts a named volume `ssh-agent-volume` at /ssh-agent to persist the ssh keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ssh-agent container is based on the jenkins/ssh-agent image and runs an SSH server to execute [Jenkins SSH Build Agent](https://plugins.jenkins.io/ssh-slaves/).
```

- Remove the volume mention
- Links to the Jenkins SSH Build Agent plugin to give actionnable to the reader

> To start the Jenkins instance and the other services defined in the docker-compose.yml file, you can use the `docker compose up` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start the Jenkins instance and the other services defined in the `docker-compose.yml` file, run the `docker compose up -d`.
```

This will pull the necessary images from Docker Hub if they are not already present on your system, and start the services in the background.

> You can then access the Jenkins web interface on port 8080 on your host system to configure and manage your Jenkins instance using `docker compose up -d`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can then access the Jenkins web interface on `http://localhost:8080` on your host system to configure and manage your Jenkins instance (were `localhost` points to the published port by your Docker Engine).
```

As always - please ensure that you know how to drive docker - especially volume handling!

> If you mount the Jenkins home directory to a directory on your Docker host up front, then the upgrade consists of `docker pull` and nothing more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you mount the Jenkins home directory to a [Docker named volume](https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/), then the upgrade consists of `docker pull` and nothing more.
```

Adds a link to docker volumes to the reader: it's up to the reader to decide wether or not to use a bind mount (which is discouraged by Docker unless you really know what you are doing), but we keep advertising a volume and that should still solve the upgrade problem (I can keep almost all your work here ❤️ )
